oh hi everybody so for today's talk I've
chosen Polaris the North Star so let's
go once around Polaris marvelous picture
of it there and it always amazes me that
people seem to think it's a really
really bright star which is kind of what
this picture implies but actually it's a
fairly modest star up there at the tail
of the little bear Ursa Miner and you
can always find it in the Northern
Hemisphere by finding the plow which is
full of bright stars and then following
the two pointer stars on the end there
and they will give you a direction over
towards
Polaris it's only a magnitude two star
these Stellar magnitudes go from
brightest being the magnitude zero or
even negative um down to 1 2 3 4 five
six as the faintest stars that you can
see so magnitude who is a little away
from being one of the really bright
stars but it has the unique position in
the sky at the moment of being directly
or very very nearly directly lined up
with the direction of the Earth's
rotational axis and the result of that
is as shown in this very long exposure
photograph here if you point a camera at
the pole
of the sky and you do a long exposure or
a series of time lapses then you find
that all the stars of the sky seem to
rotate around one particular point in
the sky and Polaris is actually very
very close to that it's less than one
degree from the pole so to all intense
purposes it marks North very effectively
you can actually see that even in this
Photograph it's turned into a slight
line in the middle a little Arc there um
so as the Earth turns once a day it
seems to nearly stay still and
everything moves around it so you can
always use it to find where North is if
you can identify it using the pointer
stars like I said but further than that
and something that I often teach my
young
students is that you can find a very
important angle by measuring the height
the angular height above North and I
always get them to draw this diagram the
Dome of the sky with us in the center
and I mark on it North and South at the
left and right of the picture there the
Zenith the straight overhead Point
straight up and then draw a line up to
the
NCP the north Celestial Pole where
Polaris is
found and the angle between the dotted
line that goes from the Center to North
and the solid line going up to point to
the NCP there that is equal to your
latitude you can see that if you work
through the geometry that uh the whole
of the um situation would be that if you
were at the North Pole Polaris would be
directly above your head that line would
swing up to the Zenith and the angle
would be 90° so you would be 90 North
if you travel down towards the equator
then that angle gets smaller and Polaris
gets lower and lower until at the
equator it would be right on the horizon
and that angle would be zero and that's
your latitude at the equator and of
course at right angles to that we've
drawn in the celestial Equator the line
around the middle of the sky which is
tilted because of your position uh your
latitude so again if you were at the
North Pole that would be running round a
circle aligned with the
Horizon so it very very useful you can
always find North and you can always
find where you are by way of latitude
and the Vikings very much relied on this
they'd figured this out and if you were
to Sail Out from Norway across the
Atlantic and if you kept observing
Polaris and you keep it on the beam of
your ship on the right hand side point
so that it's always at right angles to
you then it is north and you must be
sailing
west so you can keep on plowing across
West and they would use that to get from
places like Tron time across to Iceland
because you could pretty much sail
directly west from Norway and get
there if you went even further you could
get to Greenland and those red lines on
the chart there mark these curved
latitude lines they would be very
effective route to use and all you have
to do to do that is keep the angle
between the Horizon and
Polaris the same so that if you are
finding that it's grown too much then
you've drifted too far north if it's too
low you've drifted too far south so you
could correct your course and follow
that curve round and bump into land and
not get lost lots of cultures have got
involved with looking at Polaris I can't
go through all of them I just thought
I'd show you this this is a
Persian uh illustration of the little
bear from the uh year 864 964 there and
you can see the main stars marked out in
red and Polaris down at the tail of the
bear now as I always say in my
Planetarium shows there's something a
bit wrong here because Bears just don't
really have long tails so um I suspect
the person who draw this uh Drew this
diagram hadn't really seen a bear not
only does it turn up in Star culture and
throughout the world there are many
other examples but so famous is Polaris
the pole star the north star that it
gets into all kinds of uh literature and
cultural depictions and I just thought
I'd show you this one which was uh
Julius Caesar here uh from Shakespeare's
play referring to it and saying I am as
constant as the North Star so this is
you know been in the in the popular
culture for a very long time but there's
something wrong with this and that is
the the fact that uh it's anything but
constant um and it's even not even
constantly
North the Earth's ACC this wobbles it
processes like a gyroscope in exactly
the same way the Tilt away from
the a
vertical of 23 A2 de wobbles around a
giant Circle over many many years that's
25,000 years to do a complete uh loop
round but the result of that is that the
direction of the Earth's axis carves out
a circle on the sky and at the moment it
just happens to be moving past pois but
if you went back into Antiquity it would
have been passing the star thuban in
Draco and if you go into the future it's
going to sweep right round and
eventually we'll get to the point where
uh the nearest star to the North Pole
Position the north Celestial pole will
be the star Vega um and it after a full
lap it'll come back and pass Polaris
again so so in Antiquity and in
certainly in um the time of Julius
Caesar Polaris would not have been
terribly near the North Pole you can see
ad1 is marked on the chart there so it
it is the north uh St at the moment but
uh that's not always been the
case back when the pyramids were built
for
example neither is it constantly bright
it actually varies now the variation a
little bit subtle this is some
pulsations that it's undergone uh Alpha
Ura M minoris the brightest star in Ursa
Minor that is in fact Polaris and its
magnitude there has been going up and
down by a few tenths of a magnitude in
this uh light curve that's shown here
and uh there's even a slight drift
upwards going
on so why is it doing that what's what's
the nature of Polaris well it's a Yellow
Giant star mass is about 5.4 times that
of our sun
soul but it's swollen up into a giant
star during its uh evolutionary late
stages so it would have spent quite a
long time on the main sequence
quence fusing hydrogen to helium in its
core um built up quite a lot of helium
in that process and has then started to
evolve into a giant once the core uh
became depleted in hydrogen this is what
happens to all these main sequence
stars but the pulsation was recognized
as being something rather special and
it's a member of a class of variable
Stars called a seid
variable now these were first identified
by John goodrick in
1874 as being a separate class of
variable star all of their own and they
were named after the star Delta sephi in
the constellation of sephus so you can
see Polaris up at the top of the star
map there Delta sephi down at the b
lower uh middle there where the little
greek Delta is
another fairly modest star but pulsating
Away In This Very regular
Manner and that
pulsation of the seids turns out to be
both intriguing and really important to
the second major reason why
Polaris matters to astronomers not just
from a navigational point of view
the light curve of these seid variables
very much has this sort of slightly
rounded sharks fin appearance where it
climbs quite quickly decays down slower
and then turns a corner and Rises
rapidly again and they're very very
regular and what's going on is that the
star is pulsating not just in brightness
but in size it's changing from a smaller
hotter state where the heat flow out of
the star is being blocked
to expanding and Cooling and becoming
transparent and then once it becomes
transparent it can radiate heat the
photons can escape very rapidly and so
it dumps a load of heat cools and
shrinks again and changes back into its
opaque
form um and this is called the Edington
cycle and it's driven I think called the
Edington valve which is all down to two
different forms of helium there's doubly
ionized helium helium the second element
in the periodic table has two electrons
you knock them both off you have doubly
ionized
h++ but if you only knock one off you
have H+ just a single electron orbiting
the doubly charged nucleus so both are
electrically charged but
helium plus
is a um a partially ionized atom and the
temperature of a layer of it in the
center oh oh sorry in the outside area
of the diagram there would be around
25,000 to 30,000
degrees um in
kelvin and it would be transparent it
would let light and heat energy Escape
through the H+ layer but where it's
hotter 35,000 to 50,000 the second
electron gets knocked off the helium and
you get
h++ and that will block light it's fully
opaque so you have this double layered
ifir where the energy generating core in
the center where other nuclear fusion
processes are going on and releasing ing
large amounts of energy but that energy
is then unable to rapidly Escape through
the doubly ionized
helium and uh it uh therefore raises the
temperature and of course that's uh
vitally important in terms of uh the
process so the dou ionized helium traps
the energy increases the pressure and
the star expands out Wards and so you
get the star getting bigger now as it
gets bigger there's a larger surface
area on the surface there radiating away
and so actually the total amount of
light coming from this much larger
object uh will be able to
increase but then as it expands away due
to the pressure it can recombine with
electrons and deionize back down to
helium plus and at that point the
material transforms to
being fully transparent to all this high
energy radiation and the radiation can
rapidly escape and drop the temperature
and this is a catastrophic runaway
process in some ways once uh the
transparency Begins the heat starts to
escape then
the uh
deionization picks up pace and so the uh
process tips the other way and the
result then is that once it's dumped all
of that heat gravity uh starts to
squeeze it as the pressure drops and uh
the layers shrink back down again and
get compressed and at that point they
then uh start to uh reboot the cycle and
it all goes around
again so a very interesting process uh
just the tradeoff between light being
and heat being able to escape by
radiation versus having to Bubble its
way out through the much slower
convection
processes now this picture is of the two
dwarf galaxies that orbit around the
Milky Way these are called the large and
small melenic clouds discovered by melan
and the
explorers and these are very important
to the story as well because they were
studied by this lady Henrietta Swan
levit and she was able to use a powerful
telescope to identify a whole lot of
seid variables in the large melenic
Cloud but the crucial thing here is that
the all the stars in the large melenic
Cloud are about 160,000 light years away
from us because that's the distance to
the cloud but it's not very large it's a
a light year or a few light years across
so to within 1% or so all the stars were
at the same distance from us and what uh
Henrietta was able to do was look at the
pulsations of those stars and plot them
and she created a plot like this where
you had the period of variability going
along the bottom from small to to longer
periods plotted against how bright they
appeared to be and you find with all the
little blue dots there all the ones in
the large melenic Cloud they're all
strung out along this line very good
fit um and later that was extended to
other sepid variables shown in yellow
dots for other Milky Way objects but we
won't worry about them for now but the
point is that the ones in the large
melenic Cloud they're all at the same
distance and if they're all the same
distance away we can ignore distance and
know that
the apparent magnitude the apparent
brightness of the star is a direct
measure of its true power output its
luminosity and so what she was able able
to do was demonstrate that there was a
relationship between the power output of
a star of a seid variable star and its a
apparent uh period so if you could
measure the period of the oscillations
you could work backwards and infer from
this graph what the true Luminosity of
the object must
be well you could if you knew the
distance to the large melenic Cloud
which was a problem in itself but
relative to that you could make a very
good
estimate and this is where the stars in
the Milky Way really come in because if
we can work out how bright they are and
how far away they are at the same time
by other means and plot them on the
chart as well and see that they also fit
now we have a calibration method
so Polaris being a Milky Way seid
variable is really really important
because it's actually the closest seid
variable to our solar system and the its
distance has been measured at 433 light
years uh there have been lots of
different measurements but this is the
one from the hipparcos satellite that
was sent up into space in the '90s and
measured these things immensely
accurately so we now know the true
distance to Polaris we can see its
apparent brightness and so we can
accurately calibrate how powerful it
should be it must be because we we have
the distance and by the standard candle
rule if you double the distance you will
divide the light by four if you triple
it you'll divide it by nine it's an
inverse Square law so we can compute the
true power out put from the apparent
brightness if we know the distance and
once we've done that for one of these
seids or perhaps several of them just to
check we can use that to calibrate all
of the others now for the very distant
seids like the ones in the large melenic
Cloud we can calculate the distance
because we have the brightness and we
know the
period power output relation ship so you
measure the period that they're
pulsating you look at the uh apparent
brightness and you can read it off as to
what the uh true power output is and
from True power output and apparent
power uh brightness you can infer
Distance by the standard candle Rule and
so this is a very very important step on
the cosmic distance ladder that allows
us to evaluate the distance of objects
and it was by this method that Hubble
first discovered a sepid variable in the
Andromeda galaxy and found that it was
way way outside the Milky Way but that's
another story if we come back to Polaris
I told you it was 5.4 solar masses and I
just want to say a little bit about what
happens in the life cycle of such Stars
so they they spend a while burning
fiercely at 20,000 de or or so on the
Herz sprung Russell diagram there uh up
to the the upper left part of the line
as a a fairly bright star but when they
run out of fuel they will turn off the
main sequence line and head along that
red line the horizontal track as the
internals reorganize you end up with an
inert helium core to begin with and uh
it becomes a efficient star overall it's
the uh H hydrogen to helium Fusion is
forced out into a larger shell around
that dead core um the dead core shrinks
under Gravity because it's not releasing
any uh nuclear energy anymore but that
release of the
energy from
gravitation gives it a pulse of
heat and that can be enough to ignite
the helium if it gets to a pressure and
a temperature of 100 billion Kelvin um
sorry 100 million Kelvin then it can
ignite the helium
burning converting that by the triple
Alpha process to carbon and wakes the
star up again at which point it
increases its temperature and heads
along the second part of the red line
back across to the left and does a loop
through the it's this seid variable
stage and it's stars that are moving
through this Loop that are actually the
Yellow Giant seid
variables um and the position within
that group of seids depends on the
initial mass as to how rapidly and how
brightly they're undergoing this change
um and of course it doesn't last
long once the helium to carbon
consumption has
run out then it's forced back over to
the right hand side of the diagram again
and cools back to being another double
shelled Red Giant
star so a little diagram of that here
your main sequence star at the bottom
left Burns hydrogen in the core the Red
Giant star Burns helium over an inner
shell um but it can convert to a yellow
seid it gets has enough mass and gets
hot enough uh where it's burning helium
in the core dumping carbon into the uh
the central dead region and burning
hydrogen in a shell around it and then
uh once that carbon core starts to build
up you end up with what's called an AGB
star an asymptotic giant Branch star
where you've got inert carbon core in
the center and helium burning in a shell
and hydrogen burning over the outside of
that but you do get this brief wake up
between the uh first red giant phase and
the second red giant phase where they
have a burst of activity when there's no
real amount of dead core present and the
inner core wakes up and uh starts
carrying out Fusion so the star becomes
more efficient it's using more of its
mass to liberate energy until again it
starts to rebuild a dead
core and finally the last couple of
things that are interesting about
Polaris it turns out that it's not a
single star it's a triple star system it
has two companions so Polaris is a
Yellow Giant star five solar masses the
two companions are both slightly larger
than the sun I think one is 39% larger
and the other one's 26% larger than our
sun so so these are growing uh still
going in the main sequence and burning
hydrogen to helium in their cause will
do for quite a long time yet although
not quite as long as the
sun and they will uh run through their
life cycle and eventually swell to being
a red
giant
so those two shown in that diagram there
here's an actual photograph though so we
got the diagram shown you how to go find
Polaris
again with a small telescope you can
observe Polaris A and B separately were
first discovered by that man William
hersel in
1779 and they're 18 Arc seconds apart so
a reasonable uh separation for a a
modest telescope to be able to pick the
two apart and the upper photograph there
shows Polaris a and Polaris B clearly
separated it's not a terribly difficult
thing to do but if you want to try and
find the third member of the trio to see
Polaris a the little companion of Paris
a that's much more difficult it's only
0.2 AR seconds from uh the main star and
it's really taken the Hubble Space
Telescope to be able to have the
resolution to show that in that bottom
right hand
picture now that's it as regards
Companions of Polaris we have not yet
detected whether there are any planets
orbiting around any of these stars that
would be an interesting exercise but um
it's so far we've not found
anything what we have found
though was very
peculiar there is a cloud of gas
hydrogen dust in the form of carbon
carbon monoxide ice
crystals uh all Frozen
up all around the north Celestial pole
and in fact another one at the South
Celestial pole so it seems that these
polar Sky regions seem to contain these
Galactic clouds of material and they
been given the name which I absolutely
love of an integrated flux nebula which
sounds like uh it should have something
to do with flux capacitors um and uh
Back to the Future but uh this is a
fairly recent discovery and it seems
that many galaxies have these and I say
they're near the sky poles they're the
North and South Galactic poles that
we're talking about for these very large
extended uh clouds of this dirty Dusty
material and so uh there's a lot more
dust just out there than I thought I
thought I'd just end with that note so
thanks very much for listening I've hope
you've enjoyed that one